# Week 1
## L1.2 Rational numbers [🔗](https://youtu.be/jHBIJ50DhJQ)
#### Activity Questions $1.2$ [🔗](https://seek.onlinedegree.iitm.ac.in/courses/ns_22q3_ma1001?ann=6065501755146240&id=10&type=assignment&tab=courses)

### Rational numbers

- A number is a rational number if it can be expressed as the *ratio* of two *integers*.
- Example: $\frac{1}{5}, \frac{2}{6}, \frac{13}{15}$
- Also, as we have seen in previous [[L1.1-Natural-numbers-and-their-operations.md#Division | lecture]] that we cannot represent $19 \div 5$ as an integer.
- But, we can write it in a fraction: $3\frac{4}{5}$
- We denote a rational number as $\frac{p}{q}$,w here $p$ and $q$ are integers.
- where:
- - $p$ is *numerator* 
- - $q$ is denominator
- - $q \neq 0$
- $\mathbb{Q}$ is used to denote a set of **rational numbers**.

---
#### Representation is not unique

The same **rational** number can be written in many different ways like:
$$\frac{3}{10} = \frac{6}{20} = \frac{30}{100}$$
But, we cannot write **integers** $\mathbb{Z}$ or **natural** $\mathbb{N}$ in different ways.

---

### Operations in Rational numbers
- We can't add, sub, multiply or divide $2$ rational numbers directly.

#### Comparison
- And How do we compare, which one is big quantity or small ?
- Like is this expression correct ?
$$\frac{3}{5} \lt \frac{3}{4}$$

- In order to do any operations with them, we need their denominator to be a same number.
- So, if we find a multiple which has both $5$ and $4$ as it's factors, say $20$.
- Then, we need both their denominators too be $20$.
- So, we can multiple both fractions with each other's denominator and compare them.
$$\frac{3}{5}\times\frac{4}{4} = \frac{12}{20}$$
$$\frac{3}{4}\times\frac{5}{5} = \frac{15}{20}$$
- And, we can compare both the results:
$$\frac{12}{20} \lt \frac{15}{20}$$
- And, we can say that $\frac{12}{20}$ is less than $\frac{15}{20}$.
- Because in first, we are dividing something into $20$ parts, and we are taking $12$ of them.
- In second, we are taking $15$ of them.

---

#### Addition

- To add two rational numbers.
$$a = \frac{2}{3},\quad b = \frac{1}{4}$$
- How can we add them ?
- For that, we need their denominator to be same.
- So, we need a multiple of both denominators $3$ and $4$ which has both of them as it's factors, like $12$.
- So, similar to above in comparison
$$\frac{8}{12} + \frac{3}{12} = \frac{9}{12}$$

```ad-important
There is no limit or something that we need to have a least common multiple (LCM) like $12$ in above case, we can can have $24$ also, where $3\times8 = 24$ and $4\times6 = 24$
```

---

### Representation of Rational numbers
- If we are not doing any operations on rational numbers, then it is preferred to write fractions in their reduced form.
- Reduced form of  $\frac{p}{q}$ means, where $p$ and $q$ has no **common** factors.
- So, reduced form of $\frac{80}{100}$ is $\frac{4}{5}$
- Here, in $\frac{4}{5}$ , if we expand it, 
$$\frac{4}{5} = \frac{2 \cdot 2 \cdot 1}{5 \cdot 1}$$
- We can see now, there is no common factor in it.
#### GCD
- Now, to reduce a rational number, we can find it's greatest common divisor (GCD).
$$\gcd{(80, 100)} = 20$$
- To find greatest common divisor, we can use *Prime factorization*.

#### Prime Factorization
- It is a process of factoring a numbers in terms of *prime numbers*.
- So, prime factorization is:
$$80 = 5\cdot2\cdot2\cdot2\cdot2\cdot1$$
$$100 = 5\cdot5\cdot2\cdot2\cdot1$$
- Now, in both of the prime factorizations, we have some common factors like $2$ and $5$, lets use them:
$$20 = 5\cdot2\cdot2$$
$$20 = 5 \cdot 2 \cdot 2$$
- We can get $20$ as **Greatest Common Factor**.

---

### Density
- For each integer $m$, we have a next integer $m+1$ and a previous integer $m-1$.
- Say, if $m = 2$, then $m + 1 = 3$ and $m - 1 = 1$
- Similarly, for negative integers:
- if $m = -5$, then $m + 1 = -4$ and $m - 1 = -6$

But,
```ad-danger
- There is no integer b/w $m$ and $m+1$
- There is no integer b/w $m$ and $m-1$
```
- In $2$ rational numbers, **infinite** ($\infty$) number of rational numbers are available.
- Suppose a rational number
$$\frac{m}{n} \lt \frac{p}{q}$$
- If we take the average of two integers $m$ and $m+1$, then there is no integer b/w them.
$$\frac{m + (m+1)}{2}$$
- But, if we take the average of two rational numbers, then there will be infinite rational numbers.
$$\frac{\frac{m}{n} + \frac{p}{q}}{2}$$
- And the average can't be bigger than $2^{nd}$ number and can't be smaller than $1^{st}$ number.
- So, we can say that, **rational numbers are Dense**.
- But, **Integers are discrete**
```ad-success
**Dense**: Numbers are closely packed together and we cannot find any gap b/w $2$ rational numbers.

**Discrete**: In Integers, we have gap in b/w $2$ numbers, means there is no integer b/w $m$ and $m+1$.
```

- *Discrete* set has *next* property, where *Dense* set doesn't.
